XI. HIGHER LAWS
As I came home through the woods with my string of fish trailing my pole, it being now quite
dark, I caught a glimpse of a woodchuck stealing across my path, and felt a strange thrill
of savage delight, and was strongly tempted to seize and devour him raw—not that I was
hungry then, except for that wildness which he represented. Once or twice, however, while
I lived at the pond, I found myself ranging the woods like a half-starved hound with a
strange abandonment, seeking some kind of venison which I might devour, and no morsel
could have been too savage for me. The wildest scenes had become unaccountably familiar.
I found in myself and still find an instinct toward a higher, or as it is named, spiritual
life, as do most men, and another toward a primitive rank and savage one, and I reverence
them both. I love the wild not less than the good. The wildness and adventure that are
in fishing still recommend it to me. I like sometimes to take rank hold on life and spend
my day more as the animals do. Perhaps I have owed to this employment and to hunting, when
quite young, my close acquaintance with nature. They early introduce us to and detain us in
scenery with which otherwise, at that age, we should have little acquaintance. Fishermen,
hunters, woodchoppers, and others, spending their lives in the fields and woods, in a
peculiar sense a part of nature themselves, are often in a more favorable mood for observing
her, in the intervals of their pursuits, than the philosophers or poets even, who approach
her with expectation. She is not afraid to exhibit herself to them.
The traveler on the prairie is naturally a hunter, on the headwaters of the Missouri
and Columbia a trapper, and at the falls of St. Mary a fisherman. He who is only a traveler
learns things at second-hand and by the halves, and is poor authority. We are most interested
when science reports that those men already know practically or instinctively, for that
alone is a true humanity or account of human experience. They mistake who assert that the
Yankee has few amusements, because he has not so many public holidays, and men and boys
do not play so many games as they do in England, for here the more primitive but solitary amusements
of hunting, fishing, and the like, have not yet given place to the former. Almost every
New England boy among my contemporaries shouldered a fowling piece between the ages of ten and
fourteen, and his hunting and fishing grounds were not limited, like the preserves of an
savage. No wonder, then, that he did not oftener stay to play on the common. But already a
change is taking place, owing not to an increased humanity, but to an increased scarcity of
game, for perhaps the hunter is the greatest friend of the animals hunted, not accepting
the humane society. Moreover, when at the pond I wished sometimes to add fish to my
fare for variety. I have actually fished for the same kind of necessity that the first
fishers did. Whatever humanity I might conjure up, against it was all factitious, and concerned
my philosophy more than my feelings. I speak of fishing only now, for I had long felt
differently about fowling, and sold my gun before I went to the woods. Not that I am
less humane than others, but I did not perceive that my feelings were much affected. I did
not pity the fishes nor the worms. This was habit. As for fowling, during the last years
that I carried a gun, my excuse was that I was studying ornithology, and sought only
new or rare birds. But I confess that I am now inclined to think that there is a finer
way of studying ornithology than this. It requires so much closer attention to the habits
of the birds that, if for that reason only, I have been willing to omit the gun. Yet not
withstanding the objection on the score of humanity, I am compelled to doubt if equally
valuable sports are ever substituted for these. And when some of my friends have asked me
anxiously about their boys, whether they should let them hunt, I have answered, yes, remembering
that it was one of the best parts of my education. Make them hunters, though sportsmen only at
first, if possible, mighty hunters at last, so that they shall not find game large enough
for them in this or any vegetable wilderness, hunters as well as fishers of men. Thus far,
I am of the opinion of Chaucer's nun who, yeave not of the text a pulled hen that saith
that hunters ben not holy men.
There is a period in the history of the individual as of the race when the hunters are the best
men, as the Algonquins called them. We cannot but pity the boy who has never fired a gun.
He is no more humane, while his education has been sadly neglected. This was my answer
with respect to those youths who were bent on this pursuit, trusting that they would
soon outgrow it. No humane being, past the thoughtless age of boyhood, will wantonly
murder any creature which holds its life by the same tenure that he does. The hare in
its extremity cries like a child. I warn you, mothers, that my sympathies do not always
make the usual philanthropic distinctions. Such is oftenest the young man's introduction
to the forest and the most original part of himself. He goes thither at first as a hunter
and fisher, until at last, if he has the seeds of a better life in him, he distinguishes
his proper objects, as a poet, or naturalist it may be, and leaves the gun and fish-pole
behind. The mass of men are still and always young in this respect. In some countries a
hunting parson is no uncommon sight. Such a one might make a good shepherd's dog, but
is far from being the good shepherd. I have been surprised to consider that the only obvious
employment except wood-chopping, ice-cutting, or the like business, whichever to my knowledge
detained at Walden Pond for a whole half-day any of my fellow citizens, whether fathers
or children of the town, with just one exception, was fishing. Commonly they did not think that
they were lucky or well paid for their time unless they got a long string of fish, though
they had the opportunity of seeing the pond all the while. They might go there a thousand
times before the sediment of fishing would sink to the bottom and leave their purpose
pure, but no doubt such a clarifying process would be going on all the while. The governor
and his council faintly remember the pond, for they went to fishing there when they were
boys, but now they are too old and dignified to go a fishing, and so they know it no more
for ever. Yet even they expect to go to heaven at last. If the legislature regards it, it
is chiefly to regulate the number of hooks to be used there, but they know nothing about
the hook of hooks with which to angle for the pond itself, impaling the legislature
for abate. Thus even in civilized communities the embryo man passes through the hunter stage
of development. I have found repeatedly of late years that I cannot fish without falling
a little in self-respect. I have tried it again and again. I have skill at it and, like
many of my fellows, a certain instinct for it which revives from time to time, but always
when I have done I feel that it would have been better if I had not fished. I think that
I do not mistake. It is a faint intimation, yet so are the first streaks of mourning.
There is unquestionably this instinct in me which belongs to the lower orders of creation.
Yet with every year I am less a fisherman, though without more humanity or even wisdom.
At present I am no fisherman at all. But I see that if I were to live in a wilderness
I should again be tempted to become a fisher and hunter in earnest. Beside, there is something
essentially unclean about this diet and all flesh, and I begin to see where housework
commences and whence the endeavor which costs so much to wear a tidy and respectable appearance
each day, to keep the house sweet and free from all ill odors and sights. Having been
my own butcher and scullion and cook, as well as the gentleman for whom the dishes were
served up, I can speak from an unusually complete experience. The practical objection to animal
food in my case was its uncleanness, and besides, when I had caught and cleaned and cooked and
eaten my fish, they seemed not to have fed me essentially. It was insignificant and unnecessary,
and cost more than it came to. A little bread or a few potatoes would have done as well,
with less trouble and filth. Like many of my contemporaries I had rarely for many years
used animal food, or tea or coffee, etc., not so much because of any ill effect, but
effects which I had traced to them, as because they were not agreeable to my imagination.
The repugnance to animal food is not the effect of experience, but is an instinct. It appeared
more beautiful to live low and fare hard in many respects, and though I never did so,
I went far enough to please my imagination. I believe that every man who has ever been
earnest to preserve his higher or poetic faculties in the best condition has been particularly
inclined to abstain from animal food, and from much food of any kind. It is a significant
fact, stated by entomologists. I find it in Kirby and Spence that some insects in their
perfect state, though furnished with organs of feeding, make no use of them, and they
lay it down as a general rule that almost all insects in this state eat much less than
that of larvae. The voracious caterpillar, when transformed into a butterfly, and the
gluttonous maggot, when become a fly, content themselves with a drop or two of honey, or
some other sweet liquid. The abdomen under the wings of the butterfly still represents
the larva. This is the tidbit which tempts his insectivorous fate. The butterfly is a
human. The gross feeder is a man in the larva state, and there are whole nations in that
condition, nations without fancy or imagination, whose vast abdomens betray them. It is hard
to provide and cook so simple and clean a diet as will not offend the imagination, but
this I think is to be fed when we feed the body. They should both sit down at the same
table, yet perhaps this may be done. The fruits, eaten temperately, need not make us ashamed
of our appetites nor interrupt the worthiest pursuits, but put an extra condiment into
your dish, and it will poison you. It is not worth the while to live by rich cookery. Most
men would feel shame if caught preparing with their own hands precisely such a dinner, whether
of animal or vegetable food, as is every day prepared for them by others. Yet till this
is otherwise we are not civilized, and if gentlemen and ladies are not true, men and
women. This certainly suggests what change is to be made. It may be vain to ask why the
imagination will not be reconciled to flesh and fat. I am satisfied that it is not. Is
it not a reproach that man is a carnivorous animal? True, he can and does live, in a great
measure, by preying on other animals. But this is a miserable way, as any one who will
go to snaring rabbits or slaughtering lambs may learn, and he will be regarded as a benefactor
of his race who shall teach man to confine himself to a more innocent and wholesome diet.
Whatever my own practice may be, I have no doubt that it is a part of the destiny of
the human race in its gradual improvement to leave off eating animals, as surely as
him in contact with the more civilized. If one listens to the faintest but constant suggestions
of his genius, which are certainly true, he sees not to what extremes or even insanity
it may lead him, and yet that way, as he grows more resolute and faithful, his road lies.
The faintest assured objection, which one healthy man feels, will at length prevail
over the arguments and customs of mankind. No man ever followed his genius till it misled
him. Though the result were bodily weakness, yet perhaps no one can say that the consequences
were to be regretted, for these were a life in conformity to higher principles.
If the day and the night are such that you greet them with joy, and life emits a fragrance
like flowers and sweet scented herbs, is more elastic, more starry, more immortal, that
is your success. All nature is your congratulation, and you have cause momentarily to bless yourself.
The greatest gains and values are farthest from being appreciated. We easily come to
doubt if they exist. We soon forget them. They are the highest reality. Perhaps the
facts most astounding and most real are never communicated by man to man. The true harvest
of my daily life is somewhat as intangible and indescribable as the tints of morning
or evening. It is a little stardust caught, a segment of the rainbow which I have clutched.
Yet, for my part, I was never unusually squeamish. I could sometimes eat a fried rat with a good
relish if it were necessary. I am glad to have drunk water so long, for the same reason
that I prefer the natural sky to an opium-eater's heaven. I would feign keep sober always, and
there are infinite degrees of drunkenness. I believe that water is the only drink for
a wise man. Wine is not so noble a liquor, and think of dashing the hopes of a morning
with a cup of warm coffee, or of an evening with a dish of tea. Ah, how low I fall when
I am tempted by them! Even music may be intoxicating. Such apparently slight causes destroyed Greece
and Rome, and will destroy England and America. Of all ebriosity, who does not prefer to be
intoxicated by the air he breathes? I have found it to be the most serious objection
to coarse labors long continued, that they compelled me to eat and drink coarsely also.
But to tell the truth, I find myself at present somewhat less particular in these respects.
I carry less religion to the table, ask no blessing, not because I am wiser than I was,
but I am obliged to confess, because, however much it is to be regretted, with years I have
grown more coarse and indifferent. Perhaps these questions are entertained only in youth,
as most believe of poetry. My practice is nowhere. My opinion is here.
Nevertheless, I am far from regarding myself as one of those privileged ones to whom the
Ved refers when it says that he who has true faith in the omnipresent Supreme Being may
eat all that exists, that is, is not bound to inquire what is his food, or who prepares
it, and even in their case it is to be observed, as a Hindu commentator has remarked, that
the Vedant limits this privilege to the time of distress.
Who has not sometimes derived an inexpressible satisfaction from his food, in which appetite
had no share? I have been thrilled to think that I owed a mental perception to the concept
of the commonly gross sense of taste, that I have been inspired through the palate, that
some berries which I had eaten on a hillside had fed my genius.
The soul not being mistress of herself, says Cheng Tzu, one looks and one does not see,
one listens and one does not hear, one eats and one does not know the savor of food. He
who distinguishes the true savor of his food can never be a glutton, he who does not cannot
be otherwise. A Puritan may go to his brown bread crust with as gross an appetite as he
has ever an alderman to his turtle. Not that food which entereth into the mouth defileth
a man, but the appetite with which it is eaten. It is neither the quality nor the quantity,
but the devotion to the sensual savors, when that which is eaten is not a veined to sustain
our animal, or inspire our spiritual life, but food for the worms that possess us.
If the hunter has a taste for mud turtles, muskrats, and other such savage tidbits,
the fine lady indulges a taste for jelly made of a calf's foot, or for sardines from over
the sea, and they are even. He goes to the mill-pond, she to her preserve-pot. The wonder
is how they, how you and I, can live this slimy, beastly life, eating and drinking.
Our whole life is startlingly moral. There is never an instant's truce between virtue
and vice. Goodness is the only investment that never fails. In the music of the harp,
which trembles round the world, it is the insisting on this which thrills us. The harp
is the travelling patterer for the universe's insurance company. Recommending its laws,
and our little goodness is all the assessment that we pay. Though the youth at last grows
indifferent, the laws of the universe are not indifferent, but are forever on the side
of the most sensitive. Listen to every zephyr for some reproof, for it is surely there,
and he is unfortunate who does not hear it. We cannot touch a string, or move a stop,
but the charming moral transfixes us. Many an irksome noise go a long way off, is heard
as music, a proud sweet satire on the memeness of our lives.
We are conscious of an animal in us which awakens in proportion as our higher nature
slumbers. It is reptile and sensual, and perhaps cannot be wholly expelled, like the worms
which even in life and health occupy our bodies. Possibly we may withdraw from it, but never
change its nature. I fear that it may enjoy a certain health of its own, that we may be
well, yet not pure. The other day I picked up the lower jaw of a hog, with white and
sound teeth and tusks, which suggested that there was an animal health and vigour distinct
from the spiritual. This creature succeeded by other means than temperance and purity.
That in which men differ from brute beasts, says Mencius, is a thing very inconsiderable.
The common herd lose it very soon. Superior men, preserve it carefully. Who knows what
sort of life would result if we had attained to purity? If I knew so wise a man as could
teach me purity, I would go to seek him forthwith. A command over our passions and over the external
senses of the body and good acts are declared by the Ved to be indispensable in the mind's
approximation to God. Yet the spirit can for the time, pervade and control every member
and function of the body, and transmute what in form is the grossest sensuality into purity
and devotion. The generative energy, which when we are loose, dissipates and makes us
unclean, when we are continent, invigorates and inspires us. Chastity is the flowering
of man, and what are called genius, heroism, holiness and the like are but various fruits
which succeed it. Man flows at once to God when the channel of purity is open. The body
by turns our purity inspires and our impurity casts us down. He is blessed who is assured
that the animal is dying out in him day by day, and the divine being established. Perhaps
there is none but has cause for shame on account of the inferior and brutish nature to which
he is allied. I fear that we are such gods or demigods only as fauns and satyrs, the
divine allied to beasts, the creatures of appetite, and that to some extent our very
life is our disgrace. How happy is he who hath due place assigned to his beasts and
this afforested his mind! Can use this horse, goat, wolf, and every beast, and is not ass
himself to all the rest. Else man not only is the herd of swine those devils too which
did incline them to the headlong rage and made them worse. All sensuality is one thing
though it takes many forms. All purity is one. It is the same whether a man eat or drink
or cohabit or sleep sensually. They are but one appetite, and we only need to see a person
do any one of these things to know how great a sensualist he is. The impure can neither
stand nor sit with purity. When the reptile is attacked at one mouth of his burrow he
shows himself at another. How shall a man know if he is chased? He shall not know it.
We have heard of this virtue, but we know not what it is. We speak conformably to the
truth. From exertion come wisdom and purity, from sloth and ignorance, and sensuality.
In the student sensuality is a sluggish habit of mind. An unclean person is universally
a slothful one, one who sits by a stove, whom the sun shines on, prostrate, who reposes
without being fatigued. If you would avoid uncleanness and all the sins, work earnestly,
though it be at cleaning a stable. Nature is hard to be overcome, but she must be overcome.
What avails it that you are Christian if you are not purer than the heathen, if you deny
yourself no more if you are not more religious? I know of many systems of religion esteemed
heathenish, whose precepts fill the reader with shame and provoke him to new endeavours,
though it be to the performance of rites merely. I hesitate to say these things, but it is
not because of the subject. I care not how obscene my words are, but because I care not
speak of them without betraying my impurity. We discourse freely without shame of one form
of sensuality, and are silent about another. We are so degraded that we cannot speak simply
of the necessary functions of human nature. In earlier ages in some countries every function
was reverently spoken of and regulated by law. Nothing was too trivial for the Hindu
lawgiver, however offensive it may be to modern taste. He teaches how to eat, drink, cohabit,
void excrement and urine and the like, elevating what is mean, and does not falsely excuse
himself by calling these things trifles. Every man is the builder of a temple called
his body to the god he worships, after a style purely his own, nor can he get off by hammering
marble instead. We are all sculptors and painters, and our material is our own flesh and blood
and bones. Any nobleness begins at once to refine a man's features, and then he becomes
any meanness or sensuality to imbrute them. John Farmer sat at his door one September
evening after a hard day's work, his mind still running on his labor more or less. Having
bathed, he sat down to recreate his intellectual man. It was a rather cool evening, and some
of his neighbors were apprehending a frost. He had not attended to the train of his thoughts
long when he heard someone playing on a flute, and that sound harmonized with his mood. Still
he thought of his work. But the burden of his thought was that though this kept running
in his head, and he found himself planning and contriving it against his will, yet it
concerned him very little. It was no more than the scurf of his skin, which was constantly
shuffled off. But the notes of the flute came home to his ears out of a different sphere
from that which he worked in, and suggested work for certain faculties which slumbered
in him. They gently did away with the street and the village and the state in which he
lived. A voice said to him, Why do you stay here and live this mean, moiling life when
a glorious existence is possible for you? Those same stars twinkle over other fields
than these. But how to come out of this condition and actually migrate thither? All that he
could think of was to practice some new austerity, to let his mind descend into his body and
redeem it, and treat himself with ever-increasing respect.
End of chapter 11